Usage insights launch blog (#224)
xataio/mdx-blog: usage-insights-launch.mdx

---
title: Introducing usage monitoring
description: 'Learn about the new Usage feature available in Xata'
image:
  src: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/usage-insights-launch.jpg
  alt: Xata
author: Siobhán Meier, Ryan Slade

> date: 03-20-2022

Author: Hah hah, I even changed it once before because the day was wrong too :) 

I've updated it, hopefully for good this time!

tags: ['launch-week', 'metrics', 'announcement']
published: false

> slug: usage-metrics-launch

Reviewer: ```suggestion
slug: usage-metrics-launch
ogImage: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/usage-insights-launch.jpg
```

---

> Today we're excited to announce a brand new feature to [monitor what your using](/docs/usage-metrics) in your Xata workspace! Understandably so, our users have wanted this visibility for both planning and billing purposes. This beta release lets users explore their usage metric data at a workspace level for the first time. This is just the starting point, we have a fun roadmap ahead for how we can improve visibility and provide actionable insights on top of these metrics.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Today we're excited to announce a brand new feature to [monitor what you're using](/docs/usage-metrics) in your Xata workspace! Understandably so, our users have wanted this visibility for both planning and billing purposes. This beta release lets users explore the data of their usage metrics at a workspace level for the first time. This is just the starting point, we have a fun roadmap ahead for how we can improve visibility and provide actionable insights on top of these metrics.
```

Reviewer 2: One comment around the "monitor what you're using" phrase... it might be a little too vague and should instead be something like "monitor what data resources you're using" or something similar... expand on the "what" :)

With this release, Xata tracks and displays the following metrics so that customers can gain insight into their usage of Xata:

- **Data storage:** The storage on disk consumed by Postgres

> - **Search storage:** The storage on disk dedicated search indexing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Search storage:** The storage on disk for dedicated search indexing
```

## Feature description

The usage monitoring feature introduces a new Usage page showing detailed metrics over a number of time ranges to choose from. This new page is exclusively available to our [pro plan](/docs/concepts/pricing#pro-plan) workspaces.
![Pro workspace Usage page](images/usage-metrics-launch/pro-usage-details.png)

Additionally, pro plan workspaces receive a metrics summary for the current calendar month on the workspace landing page. This gives users an up-to-date, high level overview of the workspace usage at a glance.
![Pro workspace overview](images/usage-metrics-launch/pro-usage-overview.png)

[Free plan](/docs/concepts/pricing#free-plan) workspaces can also get a glimpse into their usage on the workspace landing page. This concisely shows the percentage of available [free tier resources](/docs/concepts/pricing#pricing-plans) that have been used in the current calendar month.
![Free workspace usage overview](images/usage-metrics-launch/free-usage-overview.png)

## Technical details

As you would expect, the data we track comes from a variety of sources and we wanted to collect it all into a single place.

> In order to power this feature we had to choose a database that is well suited to collect and report time series data and also met our usage requirements:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In order to power this feature we had to choose a database that is well-suited to collecting and reporting time series data and meeting our usage requirements:
```

**On disk compression**

One of the most impressive aspects of Clickhouse in practice is how well data is compressed on disk which is thanks in a large part to its decision to store data by column. If values in a column don’t change that frequently over time, which is often the case, then the column data can be very easily compressed.

For example, let’s take the case of tracking Postgres disk usage over time. We’re tracking four pieces of data each time we take a snapshot:

- User workspace id
- User branch id
- Disk used in bytes
- Timestamp

Because we take snapshots of this data, each row in a single snapshot will all contain the same timestamp. In practice this means that Clickhouse only needs to store the value once as well as a corresponding counter to indicate how many rows it applies to.

> Also, because we have chosen to use the [Merge Tree](https://clickhouse.com/docs/en/engines/table-engines/mergetree-family/mergetree) backend on Clickhouse it will occasionally merge snapshots together allowing it to further combine rows for the same workspace or branch together. This allows Clickhouse to efficiently store data that has a relatively low cardinality, but at the same time doesn't stop it from being able to also store high cardinality data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Also, because we have chosen to use the [Merge Tree](https://clickhouse.com/docs/en/engines/table-engines/mergetree-family/mergetree) backend on Clickhouse, it will occasionally merge snapshots together allowing it to further combine rows for the same workspace or branch together. This allows Clickhouse to efficiently store data that has a relatively low cardinality, but at the same time doesn't stop it from being able to also store high cardinality data.
```

> Clickhouse stores data in what it calls "parts", which equate in practice to a set of files on disk. Here's a snapshot from a real part showing the number of rows and space consumed both compressed and uncompressed:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Clickhouse stores data in what it calls "parts", which equate in practice to a set of files on disk. Here's a snapshot from a real part showing the number of rows and space consumed – both compressed and uncompressed:
```

```text
rows:                        300.25 million
data_uncompressed_bytes:     12.86 GiB
data_compressed_bytes:       1.13 GiB
primary_key_bytes_in_memory: 2.03 MiB
bytes_on_disk:               1.13 GiB
```

> You can see here that data has been compressed by around 12x. Additionally, because we include the workspace as part of our primary key the number of actual rows we need to scan when querying is relatively low.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can see here that data has been compressed by around 12x. Additionally, because we include the workspace as part of our primary key, the number of actual rows we need to scan when querying is relatively low.
```

```text
SELECT count(*)
FROM postgres_disk
WHERE workspace_id = 'REDACTED'

count() = 10881

1 row in set. Elapsed: 0.355 sec. Processed 45.69 thousand rows, 685.32 KB (128.57 thousand rows/s., 1.93 MB/s.)
```

Note here that instead of scanning approximately 300 million rows, we only needed to scan around 45k.

## Learn more and try it out today

> Want to learn more about the development of this feature, the folks that built it and watch a quick demo of it in action? Check out our latest meet the makers session here.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Learn more about the development of this feature from the folks that built it, and watch a quick demo to see it in action. Check out our latest meet the makers session here:
```

---

> title: Introducing Usage Insights

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Introducing usage monitoring
```

Since we don't provide any insights, I've been referring to it as usage monitoring. Only because I'd like to eventually release insights on our usage haha. Let me know what you think about the swap

> description: 'Learn about our new Usage Insights feature for both the free and pro plan'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: 'Learn about the new Usage feature available in Xata'
```

**On disk compression**

One of the most impressive aspects of Clickhouse in practice is how well data is compressed on disk which is thanks in a large part to its decision to store data by column. If values in a column don’t change that frequently over time, which is often the case, then the column data can be very easily compressed.

For example, let’s take the case of tracking Postgres disk usage over time. We’re tracking four pieces of data each time we take a snapshot:

- User workspace id
- User branch id
- Disk used in bytes
- Timestamp

Because we take snapshots of this data, each row in a single snapshot will all contain the same timestamp. In practice this means that Clickhouse only needs to store the value once as well as a corresponding counter to indicate how many rows it applies to.

> Also, because we have chosen to use the [Merge Tree](https://clickhouse.com/docs/en/engines/table-engines/mergetree-family/mergetree) backend on Clickhouse it will occasionally merge snapshots together allowing it to further combine rows for the same worspace or branch together. This allows Clickhouse to effeciently store data that has a relativley low cardinality, but at the same time doesn't stop it from being able to also store high cardinaltiy data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, because we have chosen to use the [Merge Tree](https://clickhouse.com/docs/en/engines/table-engines/mergetree-family/mergetree) backend on Clickhouse it will occasionally merge snapshots together allowing it to further combine rows for the same worspace or branch together. This allows Clickhouse to effeciently store data that has a relativley low cardinality, but at the same time doesn't stop it from being able to also store high cardinaltiy data.

## Learn more and try it out today

Want to learn more about the development of this feature, the folks that built it and watch a quick demo of it in action? Check out our latest meet the makers session here.

<ArticleVideo platform="youtube" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/1u_QoU0ckbg?si=Srq0YFvhafSpyFDe" />

Pop into [Discord](https://xata.io/discord) and say hi if you'd like to dig in further 👋

Interested in trying out for yourself? [Sign up today](https://app.xata.io/signup)! Happy building 🦋
```

---
title: Introducing usage monitoring
description: 'Learn about the new Usage feature available in Xata'
image:
  src: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/usage-insights-launch.jpg
  alt: Xata
author: Siobhán Meier, Ryan Slade
date: 03-20-2022
tags: ['launch-week', 'metrics', 'announcement']
published: false

> slug: usage-metrics-launch

Reviewer 3: Note: updated the slug to avoid reinforcing the word "insights" given prior comments.

---

> Usage monitoring is a new feature that visualizes usage of the Xata resources available to users. This beta release lets users explore their usage metric data at a workspace level for the first time.

Reviewer 3: @alexfrancoeur do we have a "marketing friendly" product description for why this feature is awesome? Most of our internal copy is pitches this as a missing feature affecting observability and customer trust. I'm struggling to parse that into a "this is why you should be excited!" message.

Xata tracks and displays the following metrics so that customers can gain insight into their usage of Xata:

- Data storage: The storage on disk consumed by Postgres
- Search storage: The storage on disk dedicated search indexing
- File storage: The storage on disk consumed by file attachments
- AI questions: The number of questions sent to the Xata [AI ask](https://xata.io/docs/sdk/ask) endpoint

> - Total branches: The current total number of of database branches

Reviewer 3: Hah! I was humming and hahing about this myself. Thanks for the suggestion 🙏

**Event processing**

For events caused by user actions we rely on the fact we store metadata about these events in DynamoDB. AWS provides a number of mechanisms for reacting to changes in Dynamo data and in our case we send change events to [Kinesis](https://aws.amazon.com/pm/kinesis/?trk=76c15db0-b03d-4489-8fe0-42aff7b6e211&sc_channel=ps&ef_id=Cj0KCQjwncWvBhD_ARIsAEb2HW9zGa3r1jh-nzDKgk5C1rMZRK7bdwnIRJRxh3hdsW48wzVwj2ooGr8aArRlEALw_wcB:G:s&s_kwcid=AL!4422!3!651612449030!e!!g!!amazon%20kinesis!19828211163!146688868243&gclid=Cj0KCQjwncWvBhD_ARIsAEb2HW9zGa3r1jh-nzDKgk5C1rMZRK7bdwnIRJRxh3hdsW48wzVwj2ooGr8aArRlEALw_wcB) which in turn spawns a lambda function which writes the event into Clickhouse. Although there are a more moving parts, it allows us to record these events almost instantaneously as well as providing a level of resilience in the face of failures since events can build up in the queue until Clickhouse is ready to receive them.

> **On disk compression**

Reviewer: @ryanslade you had mentioned wanting to add a screenshot around compression. Anything interesting we can show here?

Author: Done, PTAL.
